This approach involves incorporating firsthand observations into the assessment process as it provides a reality check on the concordance between the program theory and the program itself.[8] The observations can focus on the attainability of the outcomes, circumstances of the target population, and the plausibility of the program activities and the supporting resources.[8]

These different forms of assessment of program theory can be conducted to ensure that the program theory is sound.

Wright and Wallis (2019) described an additional technique for assessing a program theory based on the theory's structure. This approach, known as integrative propositional analysis (IPA), is based on research streams finding that theories were more likely to work as expected when they had better structure (in addition meaning and data). IPA involves, first, identifying the propositions (statements of cause-and-effect) and creating a visual diagram of those propositions. Then, the researcher examines the number of concepts and causal relationships between them (circles and arrows on the diagram) to measure the breadth and depth of understanding reflected in the theory's structure. The measure for breadth is the number of concepts. This is based on the idea that real-world programs involve a lot of interconnected parts, therefore a theory that shows a larger number of concepts shows greater breadth of understanding of the program. The depth is the percentage of concepts that are the result of more than one other concept. This is based on the idea that, in real-world programs, things have more than one cause. Hence, a concept that is the result of more than one other concept in the theory shows better understanding of that concept; a theory with a higher percentage of better-understood concepts shows a greater depth of understanding of the program.

Assessing implementation
Process analysis looks beyond the theory of what the program is supposed to do and instead evaluates how the program is being implemented. This evaluation determines whether the components identified as critical to the success of the program are being implemented. The evaluation determines whether target populations are being reached, people are receiving the intended services, staff are adequately qualified. Process evaluation is an ongoing process in which repeated measures may be used to evaluate whether the program is being implemented effectively. This problem is particularly critical because many innovations, particularly in areas like education and public policy, consist of fairly complex chains of action. For example, process evaluation can be used in public health research.[16] Many of which these elements rely on the prior correct implementation of other elements, and will fail if the prior implementation was not done correctly. This was conclusively demonstrated by Gene V. Glass and many others during the 1980s. Since incorrect or ineffective implementation will produce the same kind of neutral or negative results that would be produced by correct implementation of a poor innovation, it is essential that evaluation research assess the implementation process itself.[17] Otherwise, a good innovative idea may be mistakenly characterized as ineffective, where in fact it simply had never been implemented as designed.